# 6 May 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)


Scribe: TIM, ECH
Previous Scribe: ECH

## Topic: Info Share

TIM: have a blog post.

EAO: mentioned on slack Jan ?? - published first l10n tool using MF2 – i18next plugin for using MF2 syntax with i18next. Haven’t tried it yet. 

APP: I’ve heard two other groups are working on it, have emails from people asking questions


## Topic: PR Review
Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.

|  PR  |                         Description                         |              Recommendation             |
|:----:|:-----------------------------------------------------------:|:---------------------------------------:|
| #781 | Simplify source bidi isolation rules                        | Discuss                                 |
| #780 | [DESIGN] Contextual options in the `u:` namespace           | Discuss                                 |
| #778 | Validate test cases against a schema                        | Discuss                                 |
| #775 | Define missing definitions for ‘variables’                  | Merge                                   |
| #774 | Refactor errors, adding section for Message Function Errors | Discuss                                 |
| #773 | Add note about updates adding options causing errors        | Merge                                   |
| #769 | Add test:number and test:plural function definitions        | Discuss                                 |
| #755 | [DESIGN] Effect of selectors on placeholders                | Discuss                                 |
| #753 | Add design doc on function composition                      | LDML46                                  |
| #744 | Fix design doc                                              | Merge (approved, waiting on bearfriend) |
| #743 | Collapse all escape sequence rules into one                 | LDML46                                  |
| #728 | Add "resolved values" section to formatting                 | LDML46                                  |
| #704 | Address #703: make syntax/data model fallback clear         | LDML46                                  |
| #673 | Fix whitespace conformance to match UAX31                   | LDML46                                  |
| #646 | Update spec as if PR #645 were accepted                     | LDML46                                  |
| #645 | Add design doc for dataflow for composability               | LDML46                                  |
| #634 | Design doc to capture registry maintenance                  | LDML46                                  |
| #584 | Add new terms to glossary                                   | LDML46                                  |
| #558 | Add <when> to help select the right <match>                 | LDML46                                  |


### PR 781
APP: Skip over it just now? Other people should be aware and have a look. EAO making new proposal. Should schedule time as a group to discuss which design we’re going to use and make the associated changes.

EAO: I think the right thing to do is to continue on the PR, then bring it back here or schedule separate time

APP: Works for me. Other comments?

### PR 780
APP: Design doc for u: options. Changed to contextual options. I proposed we give some time to the PR before merging or discussing.

EAO: Was filed too close to meeting for us to really consider it here

### PR 778

APP: Validate test cases against schema – ECH, this is yours. EAO gave a “ship it”. 

ECH: I applied some changes, some as-is and some a bit different than the suggestions. Is that OK?

EAO: OK, but I haven’t looked at it

APP: Should we merge it? Is that the proposal?

EAO: The point of that is to keep us honest about what’s in the test suite, given that we have a schema.

### PR 775
APP: This is my PR, to add definitions for *variable* (etc.) I have three “ship”s on this; it’s a fairly small change, providing definitions. Any objections?

### PR 774
APP: Refactoring errors – no “ship it”s yet. RCH and I both have comments open.

EAO: This was somewhat discussed last week as well. Richard pitched that we don’t need the Formatting Error and Selection Error things to be specified at all. I haven’t had the bandwidth to look at this and consider whether that’s what we should do. Unless there’s new opinions, I think we need to wait for me to activate myself around coming up with a stronger opinion on this or changing the PR.

APP: I do think we need this to go in soonish, maybe next meeting, b/c we want to provide the shorthand definitions for errors and clean up our error story.

EAO: I guess another way of asking is: does anyone feel strongly that we really ought to have a specific Formatting Error or Selection Error?

MIH: I think I agree with Richard. It always bothered me that different implementations might detect certain errors at different points in time… feels like implementation details when you throw the error.

APP: The reason to have Selection Error or Formatting Error would be having function-internal errors that aren’t accounted for, or if we can’t enumerate all the potential errors. Suppose inside the formatter, it throws an exception. What’s the expression of that at the MessageFormat level? Is there a bucket of function errors/selection errors that that falls into? That would be the reason to have one of those. Assuming that we don’t have a clear enumeration. 

TIM: I’m also fine with removing it as long as there is some way to express internal errors in a custom function. Is the idea that there will be a more precise error for a custom function, or will formatting and selection errors be merged into one category?

EAO: Overall story would be that all of the errors coming from stuff happening in custom functions will be presented to the user as a “Message Function Error” or subclass of “Message Function Error”. I think the language around this currently is such that it allows for an impl to define more subclasses of Message Function Errors that are not currently listed in the document. Even if the spec doesn’t include formatting or selection errors, it would still be valid for an impl to produce them as long as they’re something like subclasses of Message Function Errors, whatever that happens to mean in that PL and env that it’s in. Dropping the Selection and Formatting errors doesn’t remove any capability, just removes the spec of these specific things.

ECH: I have a weak opinion here. It’s important that we don’t require this – higher-level thing. That we don’t require runtime exceptions being returned always, or we give different options for how we handle that.

APP: I think two things: 1, we’re having a meta-discussion, because EAO will go through and clean up this PR. That will reveal whether or not we still need these two “grab baggy” things we inherited. The resulting PR will be comprehensive for the names of errors we expect to have. 2. We have a topic, MIH thank you for raising an issue about it, about error handling requirements from us, and I think we should have that discussion about the error handling we require on impls. I don’t think it necessarily impacts this PR and we should work on the text before we wrap up.

EAO: The resounding lack of any explicit support for Formatting and Selection errors – I’ll probably drop those. There’s a bunch of examples that I’d like to retain some space in the spec – custom function errors that I don’t think we otherwise show in the spec anywhere else. I need to figure out how to keep those examples in so we don’t lose their value to developers. Happy to – almost certain I’ll get it done before next meeting.

APP: I think you’re right about the examples

### PR 769

APP: Add test function definitions for writing portable tests. Currently no “ship it”s on this. 

ECH: I intended to take a look before the meeting; ran out of time

APP: Do we want to wait a week?

ECH: I can look today

EAO: If ECH looks at it and is fine with it, are we ok with merging it now instead of waiting for a week?

APP: It’s been around for 3 weeks. I had a comment on it, I’ll admit I didn’t re-read this morning. 

EAO: I linkified all the things for you

APP: I don’t object

MIH: My comments last week were mostly about the naming. I’m fine not blocking it. To give them names that are closer to what we fake. Test number and test plural, or something like that. The other one would be the namespace. I don’t think we have in our spec that the test namespace is ours or is public for people to grab, or what the status is of `test` as a namespace.

APP: To be clear, these are test functions that implementors would have to implement in order to run the implementation tests. The `test` namespace is not reserved by us. Anyone can use it. They could even use it in production. Not actually in the normative part of the spec. Using `:u` would maybe be not the right thing. The second thing I call out is that I made Eemeli change the names that were previously similar to real functions that people are required to implement. The real ones pull on CLDR data, etc. We wanted to get away from that to being generic, non-locale-affected functions that are entirely described by the spec. So people could implement them once, very simply, have all the effects that complex selectors/formatters would do in real life, to prove that their MessageFormat functionality works.

### PR 755

APP: This is my design doc for “effect of selectors on placeholders”. I believe all of the issues have been addressed. Tim, you had a few comments that I didn’t change because I’m trying to avoid the word “shadow”. Otherwise this enumerates a set of options that we as a group still need to go through. Any objections remaining to keeping the PR in place?

EAO: No objection to merging as proposed, but noting it doesn’t currently include any suggested solutions. I don’t know, Addison, which is your preferred one. My question is: how are we going to haggle this one out? What’s the game plan for the next phase?

APP: We’ll have to do a discussion and if necessary, vote. The question is whether we do a formal or informal vote. My current preferred one is the first one. No, the first one is “do nothing” – local and input declarative selectors with immutability, which would introduce a syntax change to permit match to define a local. That’s kind of a big change. I could live with some of the other ones.

EAO: I don’t like that one. When Stas and I were coming up with the selection syntax for something like what we ended up with ages ago, I recall suggesting that we make all of the declarations effectively implicit selectors. This feels like it would introduce very similar functionality, with different syntax. The dual-purposing that would be happening there would be clumsy. Right now with input/local, we have a clear keyword saying “this is a declaration”. I agree that I’m getting too much into the details and this is not a topic of conversation for now. I just suspect we’ll have to figure out how to do the haggling. Happy to start on that next week if possible.

APP: Should I merge the design doc? Then I can open an issue to discuss choices.

EAO: Works for me

### PR 753

APP: Design doc on function composition. We have a couple of “ship”s and a comment from Eemeli. This has been open for a while

TIM: last week said I wanted more discussion. Will look today.

EAO: I had a similar proposal in 2021 but it got closed. The discussions were very against “what does a resolved value look like”. I would like input on the PR from Mihai about whether this sort of approach would be ok. Before we spend another year on this.

ECH: I thought it’s a pretty good/thorough coverage of the problem space. As Tim mentioned, it’s not actually proposing a solution, but rather a set of problems. We’re not just talking about what the return type is, but again, function composition. There’s at least one sub-problem among the many that this particular design doc brings up that even I hadn’t thought about. I really like this, but I think we should take a look.

APP: Tim’s going to review comments, some more discussion, we’ll work on merging next week. The whole “resolved value” thing, we have other items later – really desperately need to fix that in order to have 46 be our final answer.

### PR 743

APP: Collapsing all escape sequence rules into one

EAO: Stas, do you have any feelings on this one? I recalled you had thoughts on it

EAO: It’s about allowing for \| in pattern and allowing for `\{` / `\}` inside quoted literals without requiring escaping.

STA: I would need to page that back in. I don’t remember what I thought about it, but I don’t want to block it.

MIH: I don’t think it solves much, b/c it only allows for all the escapes, it doesn’t require them. As a user, you still have to remember the rule: if I don’t escape this here, I’m going to get an error, but there, I’m not required to escape. There are still two rules. If we make it mandatory everywhere, that’s fine, but otherwise it doesn’t solve the issue, which is that the user has to keep in mind 2 or 3 different escape rules.

EAO: I propose Stas look at the issue and comment, and if he still feels the same way, let’s agree not to merge. If Stas agrees with it, let’s talk more later.

APP: Mihai, I hear you but I think the reason it’s not required is that we do require the escapes where they are necessary. This allows translators and message writers to accidentally escape some things, or consistently escape, without having to remember which cases you escape pipe or which ones you escape bracket. My concern is that anytime we… we get into the multiple depths of escaping problem. Let’s decide. Stas, have another look and we’ll discuss next week.

### PR 728

APP: Add “resolved value” section to formatting. This has a ton of comments but no action recently. In late March, we agreed to work on in the Tech Preview period.

EAO: This too is effectively blocked by waiting for Mihai’s input, whether on a meta-level this approach is appropriate or not. Once we get that input, we can proceed.

APP: Do we need to schedule a smaller call?

EAO: I think it’s just waiting for MIhai to find time to comment on one of these issues, because he wasn’t OK with it earlier and I don’t want to spend time on it if I need to find a whole different approach.

APP: Mihai, will you have a chance to look at this for next week?

MIH: I added myself as a reviewer

EAO: See also the pings on Tim’s thing for you.

### PR 704

APP: I suspect this will be outmoded by some of the work on errors. What this does is clarify a specific piece of that.

ECH: I was going back to 728 – wondering if that also relates to the issues TIm brought up in 753.

APP: Yes, and that’s where Eemeli was calling out pinging Mihai. So those are linked.

EAO: Do I remember right about your data model / syntax error PR, that that would have introduced fallbacking behavior for data model errors, whereas currently for data model errors we go through the logo? Or was that something else?

APP: It says what to do when a syntax error is found, and it goes – trying to clarify that piece. It removes “data model error” from that; data model error is its own fallback thing.

EAO: I quite like the clarity we currently have. In that a message needs to be well-formed and valid; not have syntax or data model errors; to be formattable. If the message is not valid, then we fall back to using a fallback representation of the entire message, rather than anything within it. I’m a bit concerned that by effectively making data model errors partly recoverable, we introduce a world where data model errors are more common b/c they don’t completely crash the system and kind of work still. Especially as it’s turned out to be challenging in the ICU implementations to both format a message and provide an error on a side channel, relaxing this could prove ultimately problematic. I would prefer us to be stricter on requiring the validity of messages, as we currently do.

MIH: I’m in the same boat as Eemeli. In compiler class we were taught that parsing is easy and error recovery is hard. It’s a useful mental model to say “these are errors that show at runtime”. Syntax and data model errors can be detected with lint statically. At runtime I can have errors that result. It’s fine to not try to recover syntax errors and data model errors, because you should have linted your thing before.

EAO: And to be specific, as far as I remember, all our data model errors are detectable using no additional information than the message itself. 

MIH: I think even without registry, they’re detectable

APP: Correct; that’s by design. This doesn’t make data model errors okay; what this does do is specify the fallback string, simply. I’m happy to close this without merging, and we can struggle with 703 later.

EAO: That would be my preference.
### PR 673

APP: This has to do with whitespace conformance. Related to bidi issues. For now, I’m just keeping it here, will have to be fixed up after we resolve the bidi issues. Don’t want to merge it as is; if you have thoughts about whitespace, we’ll do another round.

EAO: Or comment on the currently-active PR that I filed on bidi, which touches on this exact same topic

APP: I don’t think it does; yours only touches the isolates, not the whitespace.

EAO: It does touch the whitespace. Just a little bit, but if anyone is interested, please take a look.

### PR 645

TIM: I need to update this once 753 is merged

### PR 634

APP: Still in progress

EAO: Question for Stas: a lot of the registry work, we’ve effectively been punting. Are you interested in still possibly working on the registry DTD or XML structure or are you currently bandwidth-limited?

STA: I’m not able to continue contributing as much as I used to. I’m still interested in certain topics. The extensibility strategy and mechanics are the most important part that I have some thoughts on. I don’t think I will have bandwidth.

EAO: That makes it sound to me like we might have an appropriate next step of working on a design doc for registry extensibility and use cases for it. Hopefully have a not-quite-so-deep technical discussion that will lead to some technical solutions where people who are not deep into DTDs might be interested in participating. I’m not sure who the right action point would be on. I don’t feel I necessarily have the bandwidth.

APP: This is an outstanding piece of our spec, something we punted to the side – it doesn’t have to be XML. Just happens to be at the moment that it’s an XML DTD. If you look at my design doc, it’s carefully not saying what the technical answers for that are. It does say there’s a machine-readable default registry, etc. What we have currently is a spec that says what’s in the default one. You’ll recall where we wrote what `:number` was and `:string` and so on. We’re missing the machine-readable bits. Would be super interesting if Tim, Mihai, Eemeli and others who have implementations have thought about how you plug in a function; what the plug-in function mechanism looks like. We might not normatively require implementations to read a registry file. If we provide that mechanism, presumably someone will want to implement it.

MIH: For the implementation, I didn’t feel any need to read the registry. In my mind, the registry is not so much for the implementation as to communicate with l10n tools and any tools in general, such as editors. I don’t see a reason for the runtime to be able to read the registry. Tooling and translation tools, in general.

EAO: I agree with the above, just stating that I’m interested in this not because of runtime concerns but b/c of tooling concerns. Who else is interested in working on this?

MIH: I’m interested in it very much, mostly for l10n tools. 

### PR 616

APP: This is your proposal that we split the accepted and rejected design docs from the ones that are under development.

EAO: I think we are consistently not tracking what’s happening with the design docs. We track PRs and issues, don’t track design docs. When looking at the repo, they are very easily lost and this whole thing feels like a write-only sort of resource. I think that’s a bit of a wasted opportunity. Ending up in a situation where the stuff we’re currently working on is in one single place so it becomes much easier to look at it and work from there. At least one or two of those have statuses that don’t correspond with reality; marked as accepted but don’t say what the proposed design is. Small first step that I’m trying again. 

APP: Some of it is on me. I will add “design status” to the list of tables in our weekly review and I’ll go through and check the status of what we have. 

EAO: There’s one doc that was accepted that I moved to the /docs/design and the stuff that we’ve got … reorganized …

APP: Let me have another look and then we can merge it offline

STA: I have a weak opinion, but would not change any paths; we have 4 years of comment history that link to different files in the repo

EAO: Just noting that changing those links in a programmatic manner afterward is not that hard.

STA: I think I mean comments in GitHub, which is a little more involved. But it’s a weak opinion. If you think it helps discoverability of our discussions, that’s fine.

APP: I think it’s more about identifying where the design documents are stone monuments to what we’ve done, vs. things that need active work. I go back and look at our design docs a lot in the course of our discussions, so they are valuable to us. But yeah, we need to do better at keeping them all in one bucket.

APP: I’ll take an action to do cleanup and comment on this PR

### PR 558

APP: Adding a when clause?

EAO: We should talk about registry before we do the changes


## Topic: Issue review
Let’s close all of the issues
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3ALDML45

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues
Currently we have 55 open (was 55 last time).
14 are Preview-Feedback
0 are resolve-candidate and proposed for close.
1 is Agenda+ and proposed for discussion.

### Issue 782

APP: Something we discussed obliquely before. Going against standard error handling patterns – the challenge is that we currently have a requirement that formatters must provide a representation of the message and also must throw an error under certain circumstances. Mihai, do you want to walk us into this?

MIH: Yes – I didn’t expect to talk about it today. Somewhere in the spec, we say implementations must return a fallback string, and must return an error or list of errors. This goes against the error handling in a lot of PLs. The point is that our spec shouldn’t force PLs to do things that don’t feel natural to them.

EAO: Has the discussion on the ICU TC gone forward?

MIH: No discussion; Tim filed a ticket against ICU, I don’t think it’s relevant in the end. ICU might say “yes we’re open to change it”, but it doesn’t matter. This is a spec that potentially applies to Rust, Go, PHP, etc.

TIM: I was thinking about this. Did try something out in my implementation in ICU4C, which is… to back up, there are different types of errors. You can have a messed up message, which is a higher level thing. Or there are lower level errors, like something goes wrong in a formatter. I thought you could have multiple returns, like collecting the one or many errors and returning them via an input/output parameter. So maybe there are ways to implement what the spec currently says.

EAO: Multiple choices – one is that we swallow errors, don’t report them. Use a fallback value somewhere in the returned formatted value. The second option is to throw an error when we encounter an error situation. What we have chosen to do so far is to take a middle path: provide a side channel or some other method like what Tim was describing, like a second return value for errors, together with at least some representation of the formatted message. I quite like where we’ve ended up, but I don’t believe it’s too badly out of whack with what real programming environments do. It’s not the usual thing, but I think the considerations of how MessageFormat is meant to be use mean we should have an unconventional solution. I think if the spec goes with a different solution, the problem is that not all implementations will handle the same situation in the same way. That’s going to bring about some challenges. I’m also concerned that it will lead to developers writing implementations that… if we don’t mandate a side channel for errors, they won’t implement it. People will get an error that wasn’t caught by any CI systems or anything. I like what we have and I think it’s appropriate for us to ask implementations to do this.

APP: I see the problem, and ICU helps illustrate the two different flavors of error handling. For developers, it’s a question of what’s the most natural way to write code that’s handling messages. If you’re a Java programmer, try/catch is well-understood. That’s different from having to check a side channel to find out whether things happened. At the same time, try/catch is not always the pattern you want to have. If you’re writing a lot of messages, you don’t want to litter your code with a bunch of try/catch. The side channel makes sense in those cases. In any event, I think it’s interesting to – might be a different approach to say what the output looks like when there’s an error, and separately what errors exist and when you’re required to generate them. Let people have a little flexibility about what the mechanism looks like — linked to what developers expect in their programming language. Not necessarily a super different thing they have to learn.

MIH: I’m not against having to report both an error and a fallback string. What bothers me is that it’s forcing implementations to invent a way to do both. It can be done / is easy to do. Does it feel normal and natural? In Rust you return a result that has either the error or the value. In Android… Would like the spec to be less opinionated. It’s too strict, can strongly recommend but shouldn’t make it a MUST.

ECH: I want to strongly +1 what Mihai said and add to it, and I know it’s going to be a repetition of the discussion from last week: Some PLs have idioms like throwing exceptions and catching, so this just doesn’t allow for being able to have a default value and return an exception. Java is a good example. You can use input/output parameters in C++, and that’s a known thing, it doesn’t work in all languages. Another important point aside from PL implementation is that there are going to be certain environments where this is running where you can’t throw exceptions, you just have to move on, because the application cannot fail. Again, like ICU, at a lower level, other applications depend on it. Part of the reason why the ICU4C error handling is the way it is is because one of the original stakeholders said “we cannot fail ever, we cannot entertain thinner library exceptions”, and that’s why it’s been that way for 20-some years. The distinction Mihai makes is important. It’s OK to say you must be able to, but to say you MUST do, is way too strong. 

USA: I do feel otherwise than what was just suggested. I understand the general notion that we cannot overspecify things, that we might be standing in the way of program patterns. There is a strong bias there with respect to how we – you wouldn’t argue that a lot of programming patterns in JS, like the event architecture, isn’t very biased by the fact that it was designed as a scripting language for the web. Similarly, in Rust it was designed as a systems language. I completely appreciate the fact that “result” is not giving us the option or leeway that we need. Thinking about the use cases of message formatting, it would be used in mostly interfaces and implementations need to give this freedom

TIM: Back to MIH said, it’s not about what’s natural in programming languages, but what’s natural for embedded languages in programming languages. What happens when SQL queries are embedded in a programming language and it has a problem. We’re doing something different, because we’re interpreting an embedded language within a language. Maybe someone else has experience in dealing with errors in that type of context.

APP: I would be a little conservative in being super prescriptive. There are places where implementers might want to make choices. MF1 does throw exceptions some of the time. We may want to give implementers some freedom. Interesting pattern inside of DateFormat in ICU – it can throw a ParseException or you can make it never throw an exception by providing a ParsePosition and using that to find out if there’s an error. So it provides separate pathways where you can get apparently error-free behavior and no try/catch, or you can detect whether an error has occurred. We might recommend patterns like that to keep people from having their code blow up because the message was poor, vs. the kind of internal errors we may not want to involve ourselves in.

EAO: I wanted to look up our actual text in the current spec. Under “Error Handling”, I think the relevant passage is: “In all cases, when encountering a runtime error, a message formatter MUST provide some representation of the message. An informative error or errors MUST also separately be provided.” If we do have language elsewhere in the spec that explicitly talks about side channels or otherwise mentions further implementation details, we should relax those. I believe this language doesn’t limit any of the mechanisms implementations could use. The JS impl provides for the format() calls to have an onError() callback that gets called when errors occur. Tim described returning a compound value that includes the formatted message and a list of errors. As a valid solution, an implementation could throw an exception on an error, but include in that exception a representation of the formatted message. It would probably be a stretch, but an implementation could provide an argument or two different methods such that one would always throw and one would always provide a fallback value and not throw. I don’t think our current spec mandates any specific mechanism for how an implementation in a locally appropriate manner provides a value and an error. Something with these loose guidelines should be implementable naturally in any environment where MF is relevant.

ECH: Wanted to go back to the idea of two different entry points/APIs where one says “return something regardless / best effort” and the other is allowed to provide an exception. We’re allowing people who need/want that extra strictness to entertain it, but are not forcing environments – giving an option for environments that need it to return a best effort. My understanding of ECMA is a lot of the APIs have a return value that’s best-effort. In certain situations there are APIs that provide exceptions at runtime. But that’s in addition to the best-effort behavior APIs. I think that needs to be clearly specified. At least, the text we have has enough room to suggest this desired state in our spec is not supported. I think that’s why I pushed back so strongly against what we have.

MIH: I agree the current spec doesn’t force a certain mechanism on implementations, but it forces you to return both things. Not the decision of the spec. We can say “this is special”, but printf does the same thing, that’s why it was designed. gettext was like that, MF was like that, tons of Windows and Mac APIs are like that. We are not the first ones to format strings. Nobody had this mechanism. It’s not like you can’t live with it. Let the framework make their own decision. We can strongly suggest something, but shouldn’t force them to do it.

APP: I’m going to slightly disagree. We have two separate statements for what implementations must do. If we modify those very lightly, we could arrive at the right destination. The first MUST sentence we have is that there has to be a way to get the fallback string. We can require that and then separately, when an error occurs, we can require it be returned in some way, that implementations not just silently give you a string back and you can’t find out that an error happened. That’s what the two MUST clauses currently do. They seem to say that you have to do both things in a very specific way. We want to permit them to be idiomatic for the PL in question and still get the fallback string and get the error and there’s a way to do that.

EAO: I’d like to push back against what Mihai mentioned on a meta-level. We are the right people to say what a l10n API should be doing, and what the appropriate expectations are. There is no other body in the world that has our authority on this topic. Why shouldn’t we voice our opinions on this?

APP: We’re close to time; a good next step is that if we’re going to make changes we should make concrete text proposals. That’s what’s at issue here, maybe. Does somebody want to make a concrete PR and then we’ll beat on that and see if we can wordsmith it? Discuss it again next time? Or in the issue?

EAO: We’ve now discussed it in two consecutive calls. I think it needs a proposed change to the spec. I’m interested in getting feedback from ICU TC about their views on this, as one of the primary implementors of the spec. 

APP: The implementors are on this call, but the owners of ICU, if you want me to ping Mark and Markus we can do that.

MIH: Probably the ICU4X folks as well. Shane would be interested.

## Topic: AOB?


